Now let's practice what we learned and dive into some of our algorithms for this I'll add a new file
l dash to and here a one to write algorithm that allows us to find out if a number is even or odd.
So even odd J.S. sounds like a good name to me.
And let me import this year Alex to even all jazz is imported and now in here de goal is that we have
a function is even or odd.
Which takes a number so not an array but a single number which of course is also something we can do.
And I want to call this is even where it odd with 10 for example and for 10 I want to get even as a
result.
And on the other hand if I call this with let's say eleven I of course want to get odd as a result.
That's the goal.
So that is the input 10 and eleven and for this algorithm the desired output then is even and odd.
How can we implement this.
Well for this we can get our resolved by dividing our number with the modulus operator by 2 and this
will give us the remainder of the division.
So for a even number the remainder will be zero.
And for an odd number the remainder will be not zero.
So we can check if assault is equal to zero and if that's the case we know it's even so then we can
return even here.
Even like this else we know we can return art.
So this is how it is algorithm could look like if we now save this you see I get even.
And that was for this line where I passed and 10 and I get odd for the line where I passed in eleven.
So this algorithm seems to do the trick.
Now we could also Shorten is a bit and write it in one line if we wanted to with a ternary expression
where a check no the voided by 2 with this modules operator.
If that is true.
So if that is anything but zero we return odd.
If it is false C so if it is 0 we return even keep in mind that 0 is treated as a false C value.
So we have to return even here for the zero for the false case and if we do that and we saved as we
would get the same output as before.
So that's an algorithm which time complexity does this algorithm half.
Now you might think that it matters how we implement it.
But that's actually not the case.
Let's see how many dynamic segments we have.
So code where the amount of executions depends on the number we pass in and here the thing is no matter
if you pass in 1 10 or 1 million as a number our code always runs exactly once.
There is no loop in there.
There is no recursion in there.
So there really is no code that would run multiple times no matter which number we pass in.
So actually here we say that this has a constant time complexity or maybe let me put it below that function
to be in line with the other code files and a constant time complexity is expressed as Big O of 1.
So this means the input really does not matter.
This always has exactly the same execution time no matter which number we feed.
And now one word of caution you have though it's the case for this algorithm but it's not always the
case that an algorithm or a function with exactly one line as we have it here has a constant execution
time and it will come back to a case where this would not be the case later so for now let's just accept
it like this and let's move on and let's add a new file alg free and then I'll add a error.
Some algorithms all named the file arrays some and imported here alg free arrays some J.S. and in there
my goal list that I have an array of let's say numbers 1 2 and 3 the numbers don't matter.
The order also does not matter and I want to be able to console log the result of a function call sum
up or whatever you want to call it where whereas pass India array and this should then give me to some
of the items.
India raised so the sum of the numbers in the array here.
So here I would want to get back 6 as a result for this example array so for Dad let's add this sum
up array here and let's accept some numbers here.
You can of course name the parameter however you want and let's build a sum.
So maybe you start let's start at zero here and return to some in the end and now we have to do something
here.
And how do we sum does up.
Well one way would be to again add a loop where we started I's that equal to zero where we go through
the entire array with this exact condition and increment i offer each iteration and then our sum is
simply the old sum plus numbers I.
So we add the number we're currently looking at for each in next year to the sum and then we return
as some in the end.
And therefore now if we save that and we reload indeed I do get six year and if we try out a different
array let's say with five here at the end then my expectation would be to get eight.
If we do this I do get eight.
So this is of course again a fairly trivial algorithm.
But let's see what's its time complexity because you really need to be able to calculate this well we
get two constant parts here.
This first one where we initialize the salmon where we return to sum.
This executes once no matter how many items are in the numbers array well and then we got a loop which
goes through the entire array.
So of course since we go through the entire array this year executes end times and is the length of
our array and we go through the entire array.
So the time complexity year would be linear expressed as 0.
And so the longer our array is the longer this function will take and it will grow in a linear way.
So 1000 items in the array take roughly 1000 times as long as a single item and with that you're hopefully
getting a feeling for these time complexities.
So let me quickly go through some of the most important ones.
For example constant time complexity which we just saw.
And no example for this would be pushing an item to an array and it will come back to erasing data structures
in the next lecture by the way.
If we push an item onto an array we append a new item at the end.
So the other items are not affected by this and therefore it is all would have a constant time complexity
no matter how many items are India array and his example here.
This operation will always take equally long and it was the same for our is even or odd function no
matter which No we checked the operation time was always the same.
Now we also learned about linear time complexity expressed with O N for example sum up which we just
created this year will take a linear amount of time.
The more items we feed in the longer it takes but it grows in a linear fashion.
One thousand items take 1000 times longer than a single item.
We also learned about quadratic time complexity where this would not be the case.
We express it with O N squared and here for example we could write our own sort algorithm which basically
uses the sorting logic.
We wrote a little bit earlier in this module where we have nested for loops if we have a for loop in
a for loop.
We typically have quadratic time complexity so dad means the more items we have the longer it takes
but this grows exponentially so to say so it's not growing in a linear way but instead at a faster rate
now.
Needless to say that of course if possible you want a wide quadratic time complexity because you'll
quickly reach a point where operations take super long or might not be solvable at all now there also
is another complexity which we haven't seen thus far and that would be logarithmic time complexity expressed
with 0 log n and here for example that would be a so-called binary search algorithm which we could implement
and they're essentially what happens is that the more items we have the longer it takes but it does
grow at a slow rate slower than linear time complexity for example.
So for a million items we don't take a million times longer than for a single item.
Now this is a time complexity we haven't seen an example for and there are about time complexities as
well.
There is a great article not written by me but very helpful which you all define attached in the last
lecture of this module where you learn more about the algorithms and time complexity in general and
where you also seek samples for different time complexities different algorithms you can check out to
see for example such a binary search algorithm for logarithmic time and so on.
This is something I would recommend as your next step when you want to dive into this topic deeper because
this is a great place to learn about different algorithms different time complexities and how to calculate
them and how to think about them.
So this is a strong recommendation that you check out this article.
Now with that however I want to leave the algorithms for now and instead focus on data structures because
that's also in the title of this module and thus far we haven't had a close look at those.